>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 26:
POPE FRANCIS IN THE CITY OF
BROTHERLY LOVE, AND URGES
ORDINARY CATHOLICS TO TAKE A
GREATER ROLE IN THE CHURCH.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
FAITH, SERVICE, SACRIFICE.
MEET THE NEW GENERATION OF MEN
HOPING TO ENTER THE PRIESTHOOD.
>> THERE IS A LOT OF TRUST TO
REBUILD, WOUNDS TO BE HEALED.
BUT I THINK WE ALL ARE HERE
BECAUSE WE WANT TO DO THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, MONITORING
A CITY'S AIR QUALITY BY TRACKING
ASTHMA PATIENTS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
POPE FRANCIS IS IN PHILADELPHIA
ON THE FINAL LEG OF HIS SIX-DAY
VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES.
AFTER HIS ARRIVAL THIS MORNING,
THE POPE LED A MASS AT THE 150-
YEAR-OLD CATHEDRAL BASILICA OF
SAINTS PETER AND PAUL.
IN HIS ADDRESS, FRANCIS STRESSED
THE IMPORTANCE OF LAY PEOPLE TO
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH, INCLUDING
WHAT HE CALLED "THE IMMENSE
CONTRIBUTION OF WOMEN," THOUGH
HE HAS REJECTED WOMEN BECOMING
PRIESTS.
>> (translated): WE KNOW THAT
THE FUTURE OF THE CHURCH IN A
RAPIDLY CHANGING SOCIETY WILL
CALL, AND EVEN NOW CALLS, FOR A
MUCH MORE ACTIVE ENGAGEMENT ON
THE PART OF THE LAITY.
>> Sreenivasan: OUTSIDE
INDEPENDENCE HALL THIS
AFTERNOON, THE POPE SPOKE ABOUT
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM AND
IMMIGRATION, USING A LECTERN
ONCE USED BY PRESIDENT ABRAHAM
LINCOLN.
THE POPE'S BIGGEST EVENT THIS
WEEKEND IS ATTENDING THE
CATHOLIC WORLD MEETING OF
FAMILIES.
AS MANY AS ONE MILLION PEOPLE
ARE EXPECTED TO ATTEND THE
FESTIVAL STAGED TONIGHT OUTSIDE
THE PHILADELPHIA MUSEUM OF ART.
AHEAD OF NEXT WEEK'S UNITED
NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY, U.N.
SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI-MOON IS
PRESSING IRAN TO HELP REACH A
POLITICAL SETTLEMENT TO THE
CIVIL WARS IN SYRIA AND YEMEN,
WHERE IRAN HAS GREAT INFLUENCE.
THE SECRETARY GENERAL MET WITH
IRANIAN PRESIDENT HASSAN ROUHANI
TODAY AT THE U.N.
ROUHANI IS AN ALLY OF SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD, AND
IS BACKING REBELS FIGHTING THE
GOVERNMENT IN YEMEN.
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY MET WITH IRAN'S FOREIGN
MINISTER TODAY, ALSO TO DISCUSS
SYRIA AND YEMEN, AND THE PENDING
DEAL FOR IRAN TO CURB ITS
NUCLEAR PROGRAM IN EXCHANGE FOR
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS RELIEF.
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND PRESIDENT
ROUHANI BOTH ADDRESS THE U.N.
MONDAY BUT HAVE NO PLANS TO
MEET.
THOUSANDS OF MIGRANTS TO EUROPE
ARE STUCK IN A NO-MAN'S LAND
BETWEEN CROATIA AND SERBIA.
THE MIGRANTS, MANY OF THEM
SYRIAN REFUGEES, ARE CAMPED OUT
IN FIELDS BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES, WHICH BOTH BORDER
HUNGARY.
SINCE HUNGARY BUILT A FENCE
ALONG ITS BORDER WITH SERBIA TWO
WEEKS AGO, MORE THAN 40,000
MIGRANTS HAVE ENTERED CROATIA
FROM SERBIA.
3,000 MIGRANTS TRANSPORTED BY
CROATIA WERE ADMITTED TO TODAY
TO HUNGARY, BUT HUNGARY IS NOW
BUILDING A FENCE ALONG ITS
BORDER WITH CROATIA, TOO.
U.S. DEFENSE SECRETARY ASH
CARTER HAS APPROVED RETURNING
GUANTANAMO DETAINEE SHAKER
AAMER, A SAUDI CITIZEN AND LEGAL
BRITISH RESIDENT, TO HIS FAMILY
IN ENGLAND.
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT HAS HELD
AAMER FOR 13 YEARS WITHOUT
PRESSING ANY CRIMINAL CHARGES.
U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCIES
DECIDED SIX YEARS AGO HE WAS NO
LONGER A THREAT.
PRIME MINISTER DAVID CAMERON IS
AMONG THE BRITISH LEADERS WHO
ADVOCATED FOR AAMER'S RELEASE.
THE 49-YEAR-OLD FATHER OF FOUR,
IS EXPECTED TO GO HOME WITHIN 30
DAYS.
113 OTHER MEN REMAIN AT
GUANTANAMO.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS
PLANNING TO SPEND ANOTHER
$300 MILLION TO PREVENT H.I.V.
AND AIDS IN AFRICA.
THE SPENDING WILL TARGET TEENAGE
GIRLS AND YOUNG WOMEN IN 10
COUNTRIES WHERE, THE
ADMINISTRATION SAYS, 1,000 WOMEN
ARE INFECTED WITH H.I.V. EVERY
DAY.
NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER SUSAN
RICE SAID TODAY THE GOAL IS TO
REDUCE H.I.V. INFECTIONS AMONG
THOSE WOMEN BY 40% OVER THE NEXT
TWO YEARS.
THIS IS THE NEXT PHASE OF THE
PRESIDENT'S EMERGENCY PLAN FOR
AIDS RELIEF, KNOWN AS "PEPFAR,"
STARTED BY PRESIDENT GEORGE W.
BUSH.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR YEARS, THE
BRITISH GOVERNMENT HAS
REPORTEDLY TRACKED AND STORED
BILLIONS OF RECORDS OF INTERNET
USE BY BRITISH CITIZENS AND
PEOPLE OUTSIDE THE U.K., IN AN
EFFORT TO TRACK EVERY VISIBLE
USER ON THE INTERNET.
THAT FINDING COMES FROM THE
INTERCEPT WEBSITE, WHICH IS
PUBLISHING FINDINGS FROM
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
CONTRACTOR EDWARD SNOWDEN'S LEAK
ON GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE
PRACTICES."
INTERCEPT" REPORTER RYAN
GALLAGHER WROTE THE STORY AND
JOINS ME NOW, VIA SKYPE, FROM
BRIGHTON, ENGLAND.
FIRST OF ALL, EXPLAIN THE SCALE
OF SURVEILLANCE THAT WAS
HAPPENING FROM THE BRITISH
EQUIVALENT OF THE N.S.A., THE
G.C.H.Q.
>> WELL, THE SKILL IS QUITE
PHENOMENAL.
I MEAN, IT'S HARD TO TRANSLATE
IT WHEN YOU JUST SEE THE
NUMBERS.
BUT YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT 30 TO
100 BILLION METADATA RECORDS OF
PHONE CALLS AND E-MAILS EVERY
SINGLE DAY, SO VAST, VAST
QUANTITIES OF INFORMATION
THEY'RE SWEEPING UP.
AND THEY'RE TALKING BY 2030
HAVING IN PLACE THE WORLD'S
LARGEST SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM,
SURPASSING WHAT THE N.S.A. AND
U.S. HAS BUILT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN SOMEBODY
HEARS THAT THERE'S MILLIONS AND
BILLIONS AND POSSIBLY TRILLIONS
OF PIECES OF DATA THEY'LL SAY,
YOU KNOW, WHAT, HOW DO YOU
ACTUALLY IDENTIFY THIS IS
SPECIFICALLY ME THAT'S DOING
THIS, OR GOING TO THE SITE, OR
SAYING THIS THING IN A CHAT
ROOM?
>> WELL, I MEAN, WE HAVE-- WE
DON'T ACTUALLY-- ONE OF THE
INTERESTING PARTS OF THE STORY
IS THAT WE HAD A BUNCH OF
SPECIFIC CASES WHERE, FOR
EXAMPLE, WE HAD MONITORED
SOMETHING LIKE 200,000 PEOPLE
FROM SOMETHING LIKE 185
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES, SO ALMOST
EVERY COUNTRY IN THE WORLD.
IN ONE CASE THEY DECIDED TO PICK
OUT JUST ONE OF THESE PEOPLE.
IT SEEMS LIKE AT RANDOM, WHAT
WEB SITE HE HAD BEEN VIEWING.
IT'S KIND OF AN ALL-SEEING
SYSTEM.
WHEN YOU'RE GATHERING THAT
AMOUNT OF INFORMATION, THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT DOES HAVE AN
IMPACT OR EFFECT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE QCHQ HAS
EVEN MORE LAX OVERSIGHT THAN THE
N.S.A.
IN YOUR ARTICLED YOU POINTED TO
A COUPLE OF CASES OF ALMOST
CORPORATE ESPIONAGE.
>> WE HAVE THE CASE WHERE THEY
WERE MONITORING PEOPLE LISTENING
TO INTERNET RADIO SHOWS.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF OTHER
REALLY FASCINATING AND IMPORTANT
CASE WHERE'S THEY'VE USED THIS
INFORMATION TO-- MAJOR EUROPEAN
TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES.
THE REASON THEY DID DID THAT IS
THEY WANTED TO GET INTO THESE
COMPANIES' SYSTEMS AND STEAL
INFORMATION THEY HELD IN THEIR
SYSTEMS BECAUSE THAT WOULD HELP
THEM SPY ON OTHER PEOPLE.
ALSO, IN THESE CASES, THESE
AMOUNTED TO MAJOR CYBER ATTACKS,
CYBERATTACKS IN EUROPE ON ALLIED
COUNTRIES, COMPANIES IN ALLIED
COUNTRIES.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, THE
RAMIFICATIONS ARE QUITE SEVERE.
EVEN IN TERMS OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION, WHAT THE U.K. AGENCY IS
DOING IN EUROPE.
>> Sreenivasan: RYAN GALLAGHER
FROM THE INTERCEPT, THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR JOINING ME.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME ON.
>> Sreenivasan: POPE FRANCIS'
VISIT COMES AT TIME WHEN U.S.
CATHOLIC CHURCH ATTENDANCE HAS
SHRUNK BY HALF IN THE PAST 40
YEARS, AND WHEN 40% OF AMERICAN
CATHOLICS WHO'VE LEFT THE CHURCH
SAY THEY DON'T INTEND TO RETURN.
BUT SINCE FRANCIS' ELEVATION TO
THE PAPACY IN 2013, THERE'S BEEN
A SLIGHT UPTICK IN ORDINATIONS--
THE NUMBER OF MEN BECOMING
PRIESTS.
THE POPE WILL SPEND HIS FINAL
EVENING IN THE U.S. TONIGHT AT A
SEMINARY JUST OUTSIDE OF
PHILADELPHIA, WHERE A DIVERSE
GENERATION OF YOUNG MEN IS
STUDYING TO BECOME THE CHURCH'S
NEXT LEADERS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
VISITED THAT SEMINARY AND HAS
THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: AT THE ST. CHARLES
BORROMEO SEMINARY OUTSIDE
PHILADELPHIA, 146 MEN ARE ON THE
DECADE-LONG PATH TO BECOMING
PRIESTS.
THE CLASSROOMS LOOK
CONVENTIONAL, AND YOU WOULD FIND
SOME OF THE COURSES LIKE SPANISH
AND PHILOSOPHY AT ANY AMERICAN
COLLEGE.
BUT YOU'LL SELDOM FIND WOMEN
HERE, AS THE CHURCH STILL
DOESN'T PERMIT WOMEN PRIESTS OR
FOR ITS PRIESTS TO MARRY.
AND CELIBACY IS STILL PART OF
THE JOB DESCRIPTION.
THAT VOW IS A WORTHY SACRIFICE,
ACCORDING TO THE SEMINARIANS WE
MET DURING OUR VISIT.
DO YOU THINK THERE ARE
MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT WHO
SEMINARIANS ARE AND WHO PRIESTS
ARE?
>> OH YEAH.
>> Reporter: LIKE WHAT?
>> I JUST THINK THEY THINK WE'RE
NOT LIKE NORMAL GUYS IN THE
SENSE THAT WE DON'T WATCH
MOVIES, WE DON'T WATCH TV.
WE DON'T PLAY SPORTS, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: DO YOU DO ANY OF
THOSE THINGS?
>> YES!
>> Reporter: ORIGINALLY FOUNDED
IN 1832 TO EDUCATE 500
SEMINARIANS, TODAY ST. CHARLES
ENROLLS LESS THAN A THIRD OF
THAT FIGURE.
THAT PARALLELS A NATIONWIDE
TREND.
SINCE 1970, THE NUMBER OF
AMERICAN PRIESTS HAS DROPPED BY
40%, FROM NEARLY 60,000 TO JUST
OVER 37,000 TODAY.
AND AS THE CATHOLIC POPULATION
SHRINKS IN THE NORTH AND EAST
AND GROWS IN THE SOUTH AND WEST,
THOUSANDS OF PARISHES ARE
WITHOUT PASTORS.
BUT SINCE 2012, THERE'S BEEN A
SMALL INCREASE IN ORDINATIONS IN
THE U.S., FROM 457 THREE YEARS
AGO TO 515 LAST YEAR.
AT ST. CHARLES, 20 MEN ENROLLED
IN THE SEMINARY THIS YEAR, UP
FROM SIX MEN THE YEAR BEFORE.
18-YEAR-OLD PHIL TRAN BEGAN HIS
STUDIES THIS FALL.
THE OLDEST OF SIX CHILDREN IN A
VIETNAMESE-AMERICAN FAMILY, TRAN
WAS IMMERSED IN CATHOLIC
TEACHINGS FROM A YOUNG AGE.
>> SO IT'S FUNNY, BECAUSE FOR
MOST OF MY LIFE, THE PRIESTHOOD
WAS SOMETHING I KIND OF RAN AWAY
FROM.
I'VE ALWAYS HAD PEOPLE GOING UP
TO ME, TELLING ME I'D MAKE A
GOOD PRIEST.
>> Reporter: BY SIXTH GRADE,
FRIENDS AND FAMILY JOKINGLY
CALLED HIM FATHER PHIL.
STILL, WHEN HE FINISHED HIGH
SCHOOL, TRAN PLANNED ON STUDYING
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AT
PHILADELPHIA'S DREXEL
UNIVERSITY, WHERE HE WAS OFFERED
A PARTIAL SCHOLARSHIP.
>> KNOWING WHO I AM AS A PERSON,
KNOWING THAT I WANT TO LIVE MY
LIFE AS A MAN OF GOD, KNOWING
THAT I HAVE A SERVANT HEART,
THAT MADE ME JUST REALIZE THAT,
YOU KNOW-- I LOVE MATH, I LOVE
SCIENCE, I LOVE ENGINEERING, BUT
I COULDN'T SEE MYSELF ENJOYING
THAT FOR THE REST OF MY LIFE,
WHEN I KNOW THAT I COULD BE
TOUCHING PEOPLE'S LIVES IN A
MORE DIRECT WAY, IN A WAY THAT
GOD MIGHT BE CALLING ME TO DO.
>> Reporter: TRAN IS ONE OF FOUR
SEMINARIANS OF VIETNAMESE ORIGIN
TO ENROLL AT ST. CHARLES THIS
YEAR-- A SIGN OF THE CHANGING
DEMOGRAPHICS WITHIN THE CHURCH.
OVER THE PAST 40 YEARS, THE
NUMBER OF FOREIGN-BORN CATHOLICS
IN THE U.S. HAS INCREASED FIVE-
FOLD, WITH AN INFLUX FROM ASIA
AND LATIN AMERICA.
MANUEL FLORES WAS BORN IN PUERTO
RICO AND SAID, AT FIRST HIS
MOTHER WAS DISAPPOINTED IN HIS
CHOICE TO BECOME A PRIEST
BECAUSE THAT MEANT HE WOULD
NEVER MARRY OR HAVE CHILDREN.
>> BEING IN A HISPANIC FAMILY,
IT'S ABOUT THE FAMILY.
SO, YOU KNOW, SHE WAS KIND OF
HALF EXPECTING ME TO BE A
FATHER, YOU KNOW, TO CHILDREN,
BE MARRIED AND SUCH.
BUT AND SHE KIND OF, AFTER I
ENTERED, IT KIND OF BECAME MORE
OF AN ACCEPTING KIND OF THING
WITH MY MOTHER.
SHE WAS VERY LOVING ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: BISHOP TIMOTHY
SENIOR OVERSEES ST. CHARLES.
AS A SEMINARIAN HERE IN 1979, HE
MET POPE JOHN PAUL II WHEN HE
VISITED PHILADELPHIA.
TODAY, BISHOP SENIOR IS
PREPARING FOR ANOTHER PAPAL
VISIT.
HE ATTRIBUTES THE RECENT UPTICK
IN SEMINARIANS TO A GENERATIONAL
CHANGE.
>> WELL I DO THINK THAT THERE'S
A SENSE AMONG YOUNGER PEOPLE
TODAY, AMONG THE MILLENNIALS, OF
THE IMPORTANCE OF SERVICE, OF A
LIFE OF SERVICE AND GIVING BACK,
AND AN ATTENTIVENESS TO THE
NEEDS OF THOSE WHO ARE LESS
FORTUNATE, AN AWARENESS THAT
SOMEHOW HOW I'VE BEEN BLESSED IS
ALSO AN OPPORTUNITY.
>> Reporter: BISHOP SENIOR SAYS
IT'S HARD TO SAY WHY THE NUMBER
OF SEMINARIANS HAS INCHED UP,
BUT HE BELIEVES POPE FRANCIS'
FOCUS ON SERVING THE POOR AND
REACHING OUT TO THOSE
DISAFFECTED BY THE CHURCH MIGHT
BE FACTORS.
>> THERE WAS FOR TOO LONG-- AND
THE HOLY FATHER HAS SAID THIS--
I THINK A PRESUMPTION THAT IT'S
LIKE THE CATHOLIC FAITH IS THE
GIFT OF THE SACRAMENTS: THE
EUCHARIST, THE CONFESSION, ALL
OF OUR TRADITION.
IT'S KIND OF, HERE IT IS, TAKE
IT OR LEAVE IT.
AND IT CAN'T BE THAT WAY.
THE CHURCH NEEDS TO TURN OUTWARD
AND TO AGAIN MEET PEOPLE WHERE
THEY ARE AND HELP THEM TO
DISCOVER THAT GREAT GIFT AGAIN.
>> Reporter: ARE WE SEEING THE
CLERGY CHANGE ALONG WITH THE
CHANGES IN THE COMPLEXION OF THE
GREATER CHURCH?
>> THEY HAVE TO.
OUR PRESBYTERATE NEEDS TO
REFLECT THE DEMOGRAPHICS OF THE
PEOPLE THAT WE SERVE.
I'M THINKING HERE IN THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF PHILADELPHIA
THAT, YOU KNOW, ST. CHARLES
SEMINARY TODAY IS 16% LATINO.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT DIVERSITY
DOESN'T INCLUDE WOMEN, DESPITE
THE FACT THAT MORE THAN HALF OF
AMERICAN CATHOLICS BELIEVE THE
CLERGY SHOULD INCLUDE THEM.
AND IT DOESN'T INCLUDE MARRIED
MEN, THOUGH OTHER CHRISTIAN
DENOMINATIONS ALLOW PASTORS TO
MARRY.
SO FAR, POPE FRANCIS IS NOT
PREPARED TO CHANGE THAT.
>> WE CAN'T CHANGE THE TEACHING
TO SOLVE A PERSONNEL PROBLEM.
THE SACRAMENTAL THEOLOGY THAT IS
EMBEDDED IN THE CHURCH'S
UNDERSTANDING OF THE PRIESTHOOD
IS RELATED TO GENDER AND SO THAT
THE PRIESTHOOD IS SOMETHING THAT
WE BELIEVE IN THE PLAN OF JESUS
WAS SOMETHING THAT HE SHARED
WITH THE 12 APOSTLES WHO WERE
MEN.
>> Reporter: AT 36-YEARS-OLD,
TIM SAHD IS NOT A TYPICAL
SEMINARIAN.
HE WORKED IN JOURNALISM AND IN
HIS FAMILY'S METAL RECYCLING
BUSINESS BEFORE DECIDING TO
BECOME A PRIEST FOUR YEARS AGO.
>> I BOUGHT A HOUSE.
YOU KNOW, I THOUGHT THIS WAS THE
LAST KIND OF MOVE.
BUT THERE WAS JUST SOMETHING
INSIDE OF ME THAT, YOU KNOW, I
DON'T KNOW THAT I COULD PROPERLY
DESCRIBE IT.
BUT I THINK ALL OF US HAVE THAT
MOMENT WHERE WE REALIZE THAT
EITHER SOMETHING FEELS RIGHT OR
IT FEELS LIKE THERE'S JUST
SOMETHING QUITE MISSING.
I'VE GIVEN THINGS UP.
BUT I DON'T LOOK AT IT THAT WAY
AT ALL.
BECAUSE THE THINGS I'VE RECEIVED
ARE SO MUCH TO ME, SO MUCH
GREATER THAN THE THINGS,
PERHAPS, THAT I'VE GIVEN UP.
>> Reporter: 40% OF SEMINARIANS
HERE AT ST. CHARLES EVENTUALLY
DECIDE NOT TO BECOME PRIESTS.
IT'S NOT ONLY THE SACRIFICES
THAT MAKE JOINING THE CLERGY A
DIFFICULT DECISION.
THERE IS ALSO THE CLOUD OF
SEXUAL ABUSE.
REVELATIONS ABOUT DECADES OF
SEXUAL ABUSE BETWEEN 1950 AND
2002 IMPLICATED MORE THAN 4,000
AMERICAN PRIESTS.
SOME PHILADELPHIA PRIESTS WENT
TO PRISON.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO A PARENT WHO
SAYS, I CAN'T TRUST THE CHURCH
TO BRING MY SON INTO THE CLERGY
BECAUSE OF THE TARNISH THAT WAS
BROUGHT BY THE SEX-ABUSE SCANDAL
AND THE SUBSEQUENT COVER-UPS?
>> I SAY I UNDERSTAND.
AND IT IS INCUMBENT UPON US TO
SERVE THE MEN WHO ARE IN
FORMATION, AND ULTIMATELY, THE
CHURCH BY MAKING SURE THAT OUR
COMMUNITY IS SERVING THE NEEDS
OF THESE MEN SO THAT THEY GROW
AND MATURE TO THE MEN THAT THEY
CAN BE.
AND THAT WE'RE DISCERNING A CALL
TO THE PRIESTHOOD FOR SOMEONE
WHO CAN EMBRACE THAT COMMITMENT
AND IS NOT GOING TO BE FAILING
IN SUCH A HORRIFIC WAY.
>> Reporter: SEMINARIANS AT ST.
CHARLES UNDERGO "SAFE
ENVIRONMENT TRAINING," PASTORAL
PSYCHOLOGY COURSES TO BE ON THE
LOOKOUT FOR ABUSE WITHIN THE
CHURCH AND ITS INSTITUTIONS.
THEY'RE ALSO TRAINED TO USE
ALCOHOL WISELY AND UNDERSTAND
BOUNDARIES BETWEEN PRIESTS AND
THEIR PARISHIONERS.
THE SOON-TO-BE-PRIESTS WE SPOKE
TO SAY: THE ABUSE SCANDAL
COMPELS THEM TO BE BETTER
PRIESTS.
>> WHEN ALL THAT CAME OUT, I
SAID I DON'T WANT TO BE THAT.
I WANT TO BE BETTER THAN THAT.
THERE IS A LOT OF TRUST TO
REBUILD, WOUNDS TO BE HEALED.
BUT I THINK WE ALL ARE HERE
BECAUSE WE WANT TO DO THAT.
>> IF ANYTHING, THE PRIEST SEX
ABUSE SCANDAL ACTUALLY MOTIVATED
ME TO TRY TO BECOME THE BEST
PRIEST I CAN BE IN ORDER TO
BRING HEALING AND TO BRING
CHRIST TO PEOPLE AND WE HAVE A
LOT OF WORK TO DO AND I THINK
POPE FRANCIS IS SO WONDERFULLY
LEADING US IN THIS SENSE, AS
WELL AS POPE BENEDICT XVI OF
TRYING TO REGAIN THE MORAL
CREDIBILITY THAT WE HAVE LOST.
>> Reporter: TONIGHT, THE
SEMINARIANS OF ST. CHARLES
BORROMEO WELCOME POPE FRANCIS
WITH SONG AND PRAYER, AND WITH A
HOPE THAT HIS PAPACY WILL BRING
RENEWED ENERGY TO THE CATHOLIC
CLERGY.
>> THERE'S NO SUGAR COATING
THERE.
HE'S ALWAYS FREE TO EXPRESS
HIMSELF AS HE IS.
HE'S NOT HIDING BEHIND ANY KIND
OF BUREAUCRATIC KIND OF, YOU
KNOW, MENTALITY.
YOU KNOW, HE'S BEING WHAT THE
CHURCH NEEDS HIM TO BE.
>> Sreenivasan: FOLLOW POPE
FRANCIS ON THE FINAL LEG OF HIS
U.S. TRIP, AND WATCH OUR
LIVESTREAM OF PAPAL EVENTS.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: TONIGHT WE BEGIN
A NEW, RECURRING SERIES LOOKING
AT INNOVATIVE IDEAS AND
EXPERIMENTS CITIES ARE USING TO
SOLVE PROBLEMS.
THE GOAL: TO IMPROVE QUALITY OF
LIFE AND SERVE AS A MODEL FOR
OTHER CITIES FACING SIMILAR
ISSUES.
FOR THE PAST THREE YEARS,
LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY, HAS BEEN
TRACKING ASTHMA SUFFERERS AS A
WAY TO MONITOR THE CITY'S
OVERALL AIR QUALITY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS THE STORY IN OUR
FIRST INSTALLMENT OF "URBAN
IDEAS".
>> Reporter: EVERY NIGHT,
USUALLY SOMEWHERE BETWEEN DINNER
TIME AND PUTTING HER CHILDREN TO
BED, LOUISVILLE NURSE DAWN SIREK
REACHES FOR HER INHALER.
>> IT'S REALLY SIMPLE, AND
THAT'S IT.
>> Reporter: ON GOOD DAYS, THIS
IS ONLY HER SECOND DOSE OF A
DAILY ASTHMA MAINTENANCE
ROUTINE.
BUT ON BAD DAYS, OF WHICH THERE
ARE MANY, DAWN SAYS SHE LOSES
COUNT OF JUST HOW MANY TIMES SHE
NEEDS TO REACH FOR THE INHALER.
>> I HAVE SYMPTOMS EVERY DAY.
IT FACTORS INTO MY LIFE EVERY
SINGLE DAY.
IT AFFECTS MY WORK, IT AFFECTS
MY BEING A MOM.
IT'S AWFUL.
>> Reporter: FOR THE PAST FEW
MONTHS, WHETHER IT IS A GOOD DAY
OR A BAD ONE, DAWN'S DAILY
BATTLE TO BREATHE HAS BECOME
INTRICATELY LINKED TO AN
INNOVATIVE PARTNERSHIP OF BIG
DATA AND PUBLIC HEALTH.
SITTING ATOP HER INHALER IS A
TINY G.P.S. TRANSMITTER THAT
WITH EACH PUFF PASSES VALUABLE
BITS OF INFORMATION THAT NOT
ONLY HELPS DAWN MANAGE HER
ASTHMA, BUT IS ALSO HELPING THE
CITY UNDERSTAND WHY SO MANY OF
ITS RESIDENTS ARE HAVING TROUBLE
BREATHING.
>> THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
RESPIRATORY THERAPISTS LIKE ME
KIND OF DREAM ABOUT.
>> Reporter: MELISSA WILLIAMS
WORKS FOR PROPELLER HEALTH, A
RESPIRATORY HEALTH COMPANY, AND
THE DATA COLLECTION PARTNER FOR
THE PROGRAM, KNOWN AS AIR
LOUISVILLE.
>> THE FIRST THING I DO IS LOG
IN, LOOK AT THE DASHBOARD.
IT'LL GIVE ME A LIST OF ALL OF
MY PATIENTS IN THE PROGRAM.
>> Reporter: COUPLED WITH A
PARTICIPANT'S SMARTPHONE, THE
SENSOR SENDS THE TIME AND
LOCATION TO PROPELLER'S CENTRAL
DATABASE, GIVING PATIENTS,
DOCTORS, AND RESPIRATORY
THERAPISTS LIKE MELISSA A REAL
TIME UNDERSTANDING OF JUST HOW
THE CITY'S ASTHMA PATIENTS ARE
FARING.
SINCE STARTING IN 2012, AIR
LOUISVILLE HAS HAD HUNDREDS OF
PARTICIPANTS AND HOPES TO ENROLL
1,000 BY YEARS END.
>> IT WILL SHOW YOU WHEN THEY
TYPICALLY HAVE EVENTS.
IT WILL GIVE YOU, LIKE, THE
AVERAGE TEMPERATURE, THE AIR
QUALITY WEATHER CONDITIONS ON
THOSE DAYS.
SO IT WILL HELP TO SIMPLIFY
TRIGGERS.
>> Reporter: WITH AN ESTIMATED
13% OF ITS POPULATION SUFFERING
FROM ASTHMA, LOUISVILLE HAS ONE
OF THE HIGHEST RATES IN THE
COUNTRY.
SITTING IN THE OHIO RIVER
VALLEY, THE CITY'S UNIQUE
GEOGRAPHY, COUPLED WITH A STEADY
FLOW OF POLLUTION FROM HEAVY
INDUSTRY AND AUTOMOBILES, MAKES
THE CITY PARTICULARLY
SUSCEPTIBLE TO POOR AIR QUALITY.
THE AMERICAN LUNG ASSOCIATION
RANKS LOUISVILLE AS THE NATION'S
15th WORST METROPOLITAN AREA FOR
AIR POLLUTION.
>> I HAVE COUNTERPARTS IN OUR
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, THEY
COLLECT BEST LISTS.
RIGHT?
SO LOUISVILLE'S THE BEST PLACE
TO RAISE A POODLE.
IT'S THE BEST PLACE FOR ASIAN
BOURBON FUSION FOOD.
I COLLECTED THE WORST LISTS.
RIGHT.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, ONE OF THE
WORST PLACES TO LIVE IN THE
COUNTRY IF YOU HAVE ASTHMA.
>> Reporter: FOR THE PAST FOUR
YEARS, AS LOUISVILLE'S FIRST
CHIEF OF CIVIC INNOVATION,
DOCTOR TED SMITH HAS SPENT MUCH
OF HIS TIME THINKING HOW THE
CITY MIGHT GET OFF OF THIS LIST.
BUT SMITH SAYS THE DATA-DRIVEN
ASTHMA HOTSPOT MAP THAT RESULTED
FROM THE INITIAL PILOT PROGRAM
BROUGHT A FEW SURPRISES.
>> THE CONVENTIONAL WISDOM
AROUND THINGS LIKE ASTHMA, YOU
KNOW, MAY BE, "WELL, IT'S ALL
ABOUT SMOKING.
OR IT'S ABOUT OLDER HOUSING
STOCK.
OR IT'S ABOUT BEING NEXT TO A
POWER PLANT OR SOMETHING."
RIGHT?
AND, YOU KNOW, IT TURNS OUT, AT
LEAST THE CLUSTERING WE SAW
EARLY WAS IN OTHER PARTS OF OUR
COMMUNITY ENTIRELY.
>> Reporter: SO BESIDES
INDUSTRIAL AREAS AND HIGHWAY
INTERSECTIONS, RESIDENTIAL AREAS
LIKE THIS ONE IN SOUTHWEST
LOUISVILLE IS A HOT SPOT.
>> IT'S BEEN FASCINATING.
BECAUSE WE'RE PUSHING THE
ENVELOPE IN TERMS OF LEARNING
FOR THE COMMUNITY, SO THAT WE
COULD SAY PRECISELY WHERE DO
ASTHMA SUFFERERS HAVE THE MOST
PROBLEM?
AND HOW CAN WE A) ADVISE THEM
ABOUT THAT?
BUT B) MITIGATE HOW THAT MIGHT
TAKE PLACE?
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU SEE AND
LOOK AT THE HOTSPOTS, I'M SURE
YOU CAN KIND OF CORRELATE THIS
TO CERTAIN ISSUES THAT EXIST
WITHIN THE CITY, WHETHER THAT BE
THE EXISTENCE OF A POWER
FACILITY OR HOUSING QUESTIONS.
DO YOU FORESEE FUTURE BATTLES
THAT WILL BE DATA-DRIVEN?
>> I WOULDN'T CALL THEM BATTLES.
BUT I WOULD SAY-- CALL IT
INFORMED DECISION MAKING.
BEFORE WE DIDN'T HAVE THAT TYPE
OF INFORMATION TO MAKE A
DECISION.
SO IT MAKES PEOPLE THINK ABOUT
PLANNING IN A MUCH MORE
THOUGHTFUL WAY.
>> Reporter: FOR ASTHMATICS LIKE
DAWN SIREK, THIS PROGRAM ISN'T
ABOUT LISTS, RANKINGS, OR CITY
PLANNING, IT'S A NEW TOOL TO
HELP HER TO LIVE AND BREATHE
EASIER.
>> MY PHONE DINGS EVERY NIGHT AT
9:00 AND EVERY MORNING 9:00 A.M.
TO REMIND ME TO TAKE MY INHALER.
AND THE APP THAT IT'S ON MY
PHONE, IT WILL TELL ME THAT IT'S
A BAD AIR QUALITY DAY.
AND I HAD NEVER PAID ATTENTION
TO THAT IN THE PAST.
AND NOW I DO.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: VOLKSWAGEN'S
EMISSIONS TEST CHEATING SCANDAL
HAS US TALKING ABOUT THE LEVEL
OF POLLUTANTS COMING OUT OF
CARS.
CALIFORNIA'S AIR RESOURCES BOARD
DECIDED FRIDAY TO REQUIRE
AUTOMAKERS TO CUT CARBON
EMISSIONS FROM GASOLINE AND
DIESEL FUEL BY 10% OVER THE NEXT
FIVE YEARS.
CALIFORNIA IS ONLY THE SECOND
STATE TO IMPOSE SUCH A STANDARD.
JOINING US FROM LOS ANGELES TO
EXPLAIN IS IAN LOVETT OF "THE
NEW YORK TIMES."
FIRST OF ALL, JUST EXPLAIN
CARBON FUEL STANDARDS FOR
SOMEONE WHO HASN'T BEEN PAYING
ATTENTION.
>> HI, HARI.
THE RULE IS DESIGNED TO CUT
EMISSIONS FROM GASOLINE AND
DIESEL FUELS.
AND WHAT IT MEANS IS THEY'RE
GOING TO REQUIRE A 10% REDUCTION
IN THE CARBON CONTENT OF THOSE
FUELS BY 2020.
WHICH WILL MEAN INCORPORATING
MORE BIOFUELS LIKE BIODIESEL.
NOW, CALIFORNIA ALREADY HAS THE
TOUGHEST EMISSION STANDARDS IN
THE COUNTRY, BUT THIS PARTICULAR
RULE HAD BEEN ON HOLD FOR LAST
SELF YEARS BECAUSE OF A LAWSUIT,
AND THE REAPPROVAL ON FRIDAYS
MEANS THE STATE CAN KEEP MOVING
FORWARD TOWARDS THE 10%
REDUCTION AND START MOVING AWAY
FROM PETROLEUM PRODUCTS AND
TOWARDS ALTERNATIVE FUELS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE
ENOUGH OF A SUPPLY OF
ALTERNATIVE FUELS FOR
CALIFORNIANS.
>> Reporter: THAT IS THE
QUESTION, WHAT THE EFFECT WILL
BE ON GAS PRICES.
THE STATE IS PROJECTING THIS
WILL LEAD TO A MAYBE $13 CENT
PER GALLON RAISE BY 2020.
I THINK THE BIG QUESTION GOING
FORWARD IS IF PRICES DO START TO
GO UP, HOW WILL PEOPLE REACT?
SO FAR, CALIFORNIANS HAVE BEEN
WILLING TO SUPPORT ENVIRONMENTAL
LAWS, EVEN THAT HAS MEANT A
SMALL HIT TO THEIR POCKETBOOKS
BUT IF IT BECOMES A LARGER
HIT IT REMAINS TO BE SEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT IAN
LOVETT, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
JAPANESE CLIMBER KURIKI, IS
CLOSING IN ON THE SUMMIT OF
MOUNT EVERETT.
HE WAS SET FOR A SOLO APPROACH
TO THE PEAK, HIS FIRST ATTEMPT
IN THE PAST SIX YEARS.
ON A PREVIOUS TRY, HE LOST THE
TIPS OF EIGHT FINGERS AND ONE
THUMB TO FROSTBITE WHEN HE GOT
STUCK AT 27,000 FEET IN MINUS 20
DEGREE WEATHER.
AND THE NEWSHOUR'S STEVEN FEE IS
IN PHILADELPHIA WITH A LOOK AT
WHAT'S ON THE PROGRAM TOMORROW.
>> THANKS, HARI.
WE'LL BE HERE IN THE CITY OF
BROTHERLY LOVE FOR POPE FRANCIS'
FINAL DAY IN THE UNITED STATES.
PLANNERS HERE EXPECT UP TO A
MILLION PEOPLE ON THE BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN PARKWAY BEHIND ME FOR
AN OPEN-AIR MASS BEFORE THE POPE
RETURNS TO ROME SUNDAY EVENING.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S ALL FOR
THIS EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.